# Atomic Habits by James Clear

Atomic Habits speaks about habits, their usefulness and their impact on our
lives. The book gives us recipes on how to create and stick to new habits that
bring positive changes to our lives and on how to avoid bad habits.

Most importantly, however, James Clear presents surprising (at least to me)
insights into what exactly habits are, why do we repeat behaviour which we know
is bad for us and how to create a system in which one can continually improve.

## Insights

## Chapter 1: The fundamentals

---

### It is the 1%

First and maybe the most important insight is that to achieve consistent
improvement we need to concentrate on making gradual (1%) changes to our lives.
Quick and large changes are hard to stick to. Focusing on gradual small changes
is far easier. The idea is that over time these 1% will accumulate and suddenly
we are far better person without the need to make sudden and big changes to our
lives.

It also paints the picture that *the trajectory* of our change - the shift, the
difference between days - is *far more important* than our current state. Even
if we have really good habits that we stick to everyday, we might stagnate for
the following 20 years and change nothing. It may be better to have the worse
habits you can imagine, but making them better every day. In other words *time
decides who is successful or not*.

---

### Progress is not linear

When we are building habits it might surprise us that our improvement is not as
quick as we thought it would be. It is not because we are not trying enough, it
is because progress is not linear. It starts slowly, going under the linear
line, and then it builds up, crossing the linear line once again and going up.

James calls the area, where the improvement is worse than we expected a *valley
of disappointment* or *Plateau of Latent Potential*. It is where our work is not
shown as much as it is being stored. In time we use this stored energy and
progress far more quickly than imagined.

The reason for this non-linearity is the [1%]. Small independent changes stack
up and suddenly life is so much easier.

---

### Its not about the goals, the systems matter

Its not our system that set us apart as a successful person,
its the systems we set and follow. There are numerous arguments for this idea,
mainly:

1. **winners and losers have the same goals** - clearly then, goals cannot
   differentiate them,

2. **achieving a goal is only momentary** - without a system in place the goal
   cannot change our lives in the long term, only in the moment,

3. **goals restrict happiness** - a goal creates a box in which we voluntary
   step in. In this box we either achieve our goal or we do not. Either we are
   successful and happy or we are a disappointment and unhappy. Instead,
   following a system is fulfilling and can make us happy all the time while
   also improving ourselves. It is important to realize there is no one path to
   success, there are many. So following the one we planned out to follow may be
   unnecessary restriction.

4. **yo-yo effect** - a goal oriented person might set high goals, then work
   hard to achieve them only to then be lazy because he/she 'earned' it. In the
   long term this behaviour does not guarantee any progress.


The gist of this is that goals are about the end result you want to achieve, but
its the system that helps us get there. Additionally, the end result is
practically meaningless in the long run -- once we achieve it, we set another
one. It is never about just a single goal. The true achievemnt would be to get
continually better, which systems enable if we are committed to it.

The implication is that we should not focus on setting better goals. Instead we
should improve our systems.

---

### Identity in behavioural change

#### Behavioural change starts with identity change

If we want to change our behaviour we might think we should do something else to
what've done til now. However there is something more powerful than the actual
behaviour. It's our identity. If we identify as a healthy person, its easy to
eat healthy -- its what we, as a healthy person do, so we don't even think about
going to McDonalds. On the other hand, its very hard to go against your identity
and that it is why we should change it *first*.

#### How to change identity

We change our identity through repeating of certain actions. Each time we do a
certain thing we convince ourselves that we are the type of person who does
precisely that thing. In other words by repeating a certain behaviour we
associate ourselves more and more with the type of person, from whom we would
expect to do the same. In that way we shape our identity.

The important characteristics of this process is that it is gradual and goes
either way. So do not expect to change your identity in a week and also keep in
mind that *every* thing we do brings us close to some identity. So if you eat
salad every evening, but have fast-food for lunch do not expect that you change
your identity from unhealthy to healthy.

It may seem like loop -- the best way how to change our behaviour is through
changing our identity, which we do so, by changing our habits. It is a loop -- a
feedback loop. It should be highlighted that it should be driven by our
identity, not by our actions. *Identity is the main motivator.*

In the sense that repeating actions -- habits -- allow us to change our
identity, gives habits whole new level of importance. Through habits we become
who we are, through habits we are also able to change who we are entirely.

#### Summary

The simple 2-step process on behavioural change is the following:

1. decide on the type of person who you want to be,
2. prove it to yourself with small wins.

In the first step we decide on the identity we strive for. In the second point
we do the thing which would person with the given identity naturally do. This
reinforces our identity, and in turn we tend to "win" more i.e. do the things we
want to do.

The first question can be also put differently: "Who is the type of person that
could get that outcome I want?" This is a good starting point, however later we
should always focus on the identity first, not on the outcomes.

---

### Habits as automation

To put it simply habits are reliable solutions to occurring problems that we
have learned in the past. This creates a shortcut, so that the brain does not
have to brainstorm for ideas when its faced with a situation. It instead chooses
to do what it did before on an subconscious level. This is critical as *the
bottleneck of the mind is the conscious level*. Our mind knows this and leaves
anything it can to the subconscious part. We can help it by automating tasks we
do on daily basis by creating habits out of them. We associate the trigger and
just run on autopilot.

Automating as many task as we can could feel like we are not even trying to live
a full live. It could feel like we are avoiding rich experiences by making our
life "easy". Like habits restrict us. However the opposite is true. The more
dull and repeating actions we can automate, the more time we can have for things
that truly matter. In this way habits lift the burden of everyday tasks, so we
can concentrate on the fun parts.

----

### How to easily form new habits and get rid of unwanted ones

Every repeating behaviour in our lives is governed by underlying principle. The
behaviour is our solution to a problem. It could be that we want something we
don't have or that we'd like something to change. That's the problem. The
proposed solution is represented by our actions that follow -- by the habit.
Timeline of the process goes like this:

1. cue - this is where we first notice the problem,
2. craving - in this part we realize we desire something - a change,
3. response - our proposed solution,
4. reward - what we get for our effort.

We are constantly searching for cues that indicate a future reward -- the
solution. In this way rewards, firstly, satisfy our needs by giving us something
and secondly they teach us, they help us grow. Thanks to rewards we memorize the
cues, which makes the apparently successful (since we received a reward)
behaviour repeat next time.

<!-- The four stages form a loop - a feedback loop, which makes it easier and easier to -->
<!-- carry out the habit the more times we have completed it. The more rewarding it -->
<!-- is, the more likely it is that we notice the cue next time around. -->

Without any of the four parts habit will not form. Ergo if we want to form new
habit we must ensure each part happens or at least that it is highly probable.
This is where the following rules originate:

1. (cue) Make it obvious - so that we notice the 'problem' or that a reward may
   come,
2. (craving) Make it attractive - so that we have enough motivation to follow
   through,
3. (response) Make it easy - so that there is minimal resistance against us,
4. (reward) Make it satisfying - so that we are more likely notice the cue next
   time.

On the other hand if we want to get rid of a habit we must follow the opposite
principles:

1. (cue) Make it invisible,
2. (craving) Make it unattractive,
3. (response) Make it difficult,
4. (reward) Make it unsatisfying.

TODO: go through, get rid of citations, group similar ideas

### The cue


Cues don't have to be some big and striking (although it helps us to notice it).
It can be just some minor thing. Our brains are so used to searching for cues
that they can find them anywhere. Once they do, unconscious level of our mind
takes over and finishes the automatic action. This is what makes habits so
useful, but also dangerous.

> *As the psychologist Carl Jung said, “Until you make the unconscious
> conscious, it will direct your life and you will call it fate.”*

### Clean slate

Before we dive into changing our lives its good to get rid of our current
negative habits. This will avoid future setbacks where the old negative habits
are standing in the way of new good habits.

> *As the psychologist Carl Jung said, "Until you make the unconscious conscious,
> it will direct your life and you will call it fate."*

The point is not to punish ourselves, the
point is to recognize what we are doing - almost from the point of a 3rd person
studying us: "How interesting that he/she is doing exactly this thing."

### Pointing and calling

To get rid of a deeply rooted negative habits we must first become aware of
them. This may prove difficult as we are probably doing them unconsciously.
James points out a trick called *pointing and calling* which forces us to think
about what we are doing (or seeing or feeling or ...) by pointing to the given
thing and saying out loud what it is we are pointing at.

### Habits scorecard

To become aware of our behaviour not just in the moment but as a whole its
helpful to write the actions we do out. James calls this a **habits scorecard**.
Basically we enumerate things we've done (e.g. throughout a day) and assign each
activity + or - depending on whether the action was useful or effective in
proving to ourselves of our target identity or not.

I am guessing that habits scorecard should be especially useful when something
in your behaviour patterns may be wrong but you do not know what.

### Implementation intentions

To make sure we are in fact going to do what we set out to do instead of just
talking about it James proposes to use an **implementation intention**. In
essence implementation intention is a plan how to implement a certain habit (in
various research papers the fact that people make this kind of plan increases
the chances of them sticking to a habit by factor of two).

Implementation intention usually leverages some kind of a cue to trigger a
habit. The most successful cues turned out to be *time* and *location*. So in
its simplest form implementation intention takes form of the following sentence:

> "I will perform [action X] on [location Y] at [time Z]."

However the key of implementation intention is to set **clear plan**.

> *"Many people think they lack motivation when what they really lack is
> clarity."*

A more complex form of implementation intentions is *habit stacking*.

### Habit stacking

Habits stacking is a form of implementation intention which leverages the idea
of habits' cues. The idea is that we learn to recognise end of one habit as a cue
for the next one. In this way we can stack one habit onto another, creating a
chain.

The idea of habit stacking is not new. In fact many things what we will do are
influenced by the things we've just finished doing. In a sense, then, habit
stacking is a variant of implementation intention that appears more natural then
setting time and location.


### Cue selection

The most important properties of a cue is that:

  - it needs to be clear and
  - it needs to be as concrete as possible.

Also consider when you are most likely to notice the cue and finish the habit.
The most powerful cues are visual ones. We really on our sight more than on our
other senses, so it makes sense to e.g. place a guitar in the middle of the room
to push yourself to start practicing.

### Change the environment change the game

Environment shapes our behaviour in it. We incline to do the thing the
environment we are in was designed for. Just because we do not have the willpower
to go through the entire day/week/month/year/life. The trick is to use this
power to our advantage. Design the environment so that it is obvious that you
should do the thing you want to do (e.g. your habit) and so that it is easy to
do it. Or if you want to get rid of a habit, design the environment so that it
becomes hard or impossible to do it.

Environment design is powerful because we can actually influence how the world
influences us. So we do not have to be the "victims", we can be the "gods".

### Relationships with contexts

We build relationships with different places and environments. We rest and
watch TV in the living room, we sleep in the bedroom,... While inhabiting those
environments we automatically do what the relationship with the given place
dictates us to do. We associate our surroundings (or context) with what we do
there.

### Design one place for one thing

If we do two very distinct things in one place we are then confused what it is
that we should do. Take bedroom. If we work in the bedroom, we might not know
whether it is OK to answer emails, right before we turn our lights off. We have
to think about what we should do and what we should not do. Instead it is better
to designate only one activity to a given place in order to automate the task.

### New places as starting points

We can use our automatic association context-activity within that context, to
our advantage. When starting a new habit find a new context, new environment.
With new environments we do not have to "overwrite" the actions we've associated
with the given place, we only have to create new association. That is way
easier for our mind.

### One cue, multiple cues, context as a cue

The mind blowing thing is that a habit does not have be associated with only one
cue. With multiple cues we are more likely to notice one of them and actually do
the action we wanted to do.

Another level is associating a context with a habit - i.e. using context as a
cue. This is even more powerful as we cannot ignore our entire surroundings.


### Discipline always looses against properly setup environment

The bond we create with our environment (relationships with contexts) is
stronger than we might think. It is so strong that it proves our belief that
willpower is the key to success/self-control/happy life as (at least partially)
false. In the long run it does not matter how disciplined we are, if the
environment tempts us to do some thing (e.g. smoke, drink, cheat, steal, ...) we
will do it sooner or later.

As a consequence we cannot hope to become more disciplined by simply trying
more. Instead we must change our environment, so that we are more disciplined in
it. So we do not improve our self-control by actually improving our willpower,
but by changing the context, which tempts us less.


### Feedback loops of bad habits

Bad habits sometimes start a loop which feeds itself. For example: we might be
obese and overeat often. Somebody tells us we should eat less (or we simply
realize it) and so we start to worry and feel anxious. And the perfect solution
to anxiety already sits in our brain: eating. And so the loops continues again.

### Getting rid of habits

We might break a habit, sure. But it is unlikely that we will *forget it*. Even
though the habit is unused, it is still in our memory. And it may be so for
quite a long time. It simply waits until our willpower depletes and then
resurfaces.

We must be wary of that and do not let the cues that trigger that habit to enter
our lives too often. As was already said in [Discipline always looses against
properly setup environment] we should rely on our willpower. Instead change the
environment so that the cue becomes *invisible*.

## Chapter 2: Make it desireble

### Temptations of our world keep getting greater and greater

In our world we are used to really tempting things. Cheesburgers are salty,
sweet and fatty at the same time, manequines and models are unhumanly perfect.
Everything which sells is designed to be irresistible. While the natural rewards
that our ancestors were used to are of the same level as they always were.


### Dopamine and desire

Dopamine is a neurotransmitter that signals craving. When dopamine is released
we feel motivated to act. However the research shows that it is released when we
anticipate reward, not when we actually experience it. So we do not need to
achive something to feel motivated, we only need to anticipate it. So
anticipation gets us moving.


### Temptation bundling

The idea of temptation bundling is that we do the things we *want to* with or
before the things we *need to do*. By linking the behaviour we need to do with
something desirable we are more likely to find that behaviour desireble.

Temptation bundling can be even combined with [habit stacking], interleaving
habits we want to do with our duties (or doing duties before and desirable
activities after).

### Effect of the close, the many and the powerfull people

In our heart we want to belong. It is something we took from our ancestors - the
individual who sicked out was either eaten by a pack of woolfs or left without
care to die by other means. And so we imitate the behaviour of three groups of
peaople to reinforce the feeling that we are not alone:

1. the close: people who are our closest friends and family,
2. the many: society, masses of people around us,
3. the powerful: the successful who are at the top.

Those three groups of people have big effect on us because either they are:

1. those who represent our beliefs, our culture, our tribe, our team,
2. the mass who represent the average, the common of those who survived,
3. the elite who are doing something different to become better than the rest.

Therefore it is quite useful to join a group where our desired behaviour is the
normal. Then we'd naturally incline to do what we set out to do.

Unfortunately we cannot use the influences of the second two groups to our
advantage, but we can become aware of them. Be wary that *sometimes the crowd is
wrong* and sometimes it is right to stand by you opinion. And that doing things
that makes us like the powerful - *to earn money, respect, approval - are
naturally desirable* things to us.

### Cravings push us to fulfill a deeper motive

Every craving we have has a surface and a deeper motive. The catch is there are
multiple ways how to satisfy the deeper motive. The action with which we react
to the craving -- the action, we think, satisfies the deeper motive, may not be
the only one or even the best. This shines a new light on our habits. Firstly we
can get rid of bad habits and replace them with new good habits while addressing
the same deep craving. Secondly, we should think about all our habits, the deep
motives they satisfy and whether they are a good fit for us. Isn't there a
better reaction to a given deeper motive?

### Cravings come from our predictions

We act because we've predicted that if we do what we are planning to do we will
feel somehow better. This means that our behaviour is not based on objective
reality, but how we understand it. Based on what we think, we make a prediction
which influences what we are going to do. For example if we believe we will win
in lottery we might want to buy a lottery ticket. On the other hand buying it
when we do not believe we will win is stupid thing to do. The reality wasn't
changed, only our beliefs and in consequence our prediction.


### Feelings and emotions communicate to us our cravings

Feelings and emotions serve as universal language. The translate craving (or
a deeper motive TODO:ref) we have into something which we can process -- a
feeling or emotion. Consequently we understand craving through the language of
emotions -- we want to feel differently. Sometimes we just feel something is
missing, that something needs to change. Emotions describe the craving and tell
us about what needs to change in order to satisfy the craving.

### Reframing difficult habits

We can shift our mindset by associating difficult habits with positive experiences.
In some instances we just need to reframe the habits to emphasize their
benefits. For example you don't *have to* exercise, you *get to* exercise. You
focus on the positive effect of the habit rather than on it's difficulty. Most
importantly we always find supporting facts for whatever mindset we decide to
have.

Reframing our habits can be taken a step further by creating a ritual, during
which we associate the state of mind with our current activity -- not
necessarily a difficult one. Then if we need to "get in the zone" we simply
repeat the activity. This works for sports, happiness (e.g. meditation
breathing) but even for sex.

TODO: do not really get this part ...
These rituals can help us with difficult habits -- doing something we enjoy
before the difficult habit creates an association: 'something we enjoy':
difficult habit.

---
## Chapter 3: Make it easy

### Motion and action, repetition and perfection

*Motion* is about planning, strategizing, searching for optimal solution. It
seems like you are moving forward. That may be true, but you are not producing
anything. There is no outcome to beeing in motion. On the other hand, taking an
*action* means actually doing something.

In planning, strategizing, ... (when in motion) there is a point after which it
is just procrastination. In fact we usually do procrastinate like this because
we fear failure, which is impossible if we do not do anything.

We may think that by planning beforehand we may achieve better result than if we
do not prepare at all. That may be true, but repetition always wins when
compared to perfection. We may try to be perfect but we never actually achieve
it. But by repetition we get continuesly better. And that is what matters.

TODO: link to 1%




